The Joe Rogan experience.
So you were a part of this, uh,
open letter recently about COVID-19 or you want to
get to the bottom of the origins of it. And, um,
this is something we've talked about on the podcast before,
and a lot of people have been talking about it lately.
Now that Trump's out of office, it's sort of freed up the discussion, right? Uh,
for the longest time discussing that in terms of like it
not being just some sort of a random mutation from bats and Corona
viruses that it may have been a lab leak was so taboo because it was what Trump
was pushing. And it's,
it's so crazy that something which is science,
it says it's a scientific discussion and inquiry that it could be
stunted by these political ideas when someone is so
polarizing, like Trump,
that people just completely want to reject like very plausible and possible
ideas just because of him.
It's exactly right. I was the lead drafter, uh,
with a community of other of other people and lead scientists around the world,
um, of this letter. And since the beginning of last year,
2020, I had maybe the leading website in the world that was just, um,
stating what is the evidence about the origins of COVID-19
particularly the evidence for a lab leak. Um,
and the evidence is actually really strong. It's all circumstantial evidence.
Um, but we don't have any evidence of the other hypotheses of where COVID
comes from, like these, this, uh,
series of jumps through different animals in the wild. And so I,
for a long time, more than a year have been saying, Hey,
we need to look really seriously at this. Not because we know we're certainly,
I don't know for sure that's where COVID comes from, but in my view,
it's the most likely hypothesis worthy of a full
investigation. And so, uh,
there was a world health organization or, uh,
organized an independent advisory committee and they went on a
study mission, uh, to China, uh, in earlier this year, 2021.
And then they came out with a re uh, with a, they had a press event in Wu Han,
which was a joint press event between this committee and their Chinese
government counterparts. And in that press event, what they said was, um, we're,
we don't support investigating the possibility of a lab leak any further. Um,
but we should investigate what seems like a much less likely hypothesis that
COVID started with frozen foods being shipped to Wu Han.
And so we already had a community of scientists and others who'd been meeting
virtually, um, for a while trying to say, to really say,
where does this come from? What's the evidence. Uh,
we had the academic presentations, challenging the data,
trying to figure out where are the gaps. And we looked at that and said,
that that can't be right. And we decided we needed to put out an open letter,
which we, which we recently released.
And it was covered in newspapers all around the world.
And the letter made kind of key points.
One is that this is a terrible pandemic.
We have to understand where it came from too,
that this current investigation is not the kind of full investigation
that's needed. And three here's what a full investigation looks like,
and we call on governments to do it. But your point that it's been,
it's been taboo for the year is exactly right.
And it's just crazy because it seems, this is a really, in my view,
likely possibility. I can't say for sure,
we should be investigating all hypotheses.
Not saying we can't even look at something that that really could be the.
And it's also really unfortunate that a lot of people are not
trusting anything that the world health organization says anymore because the
world health organization, I'm sure you saw the, uh,
spokesperson for the world health organization,
speaking with a reporter and he wouldn't even mention the name Taiwan.
Did you see that?
No. So it's, I did see that and, and he.
Logs off and then comes back on and then she asked him again about Taiwan's
response to COVID-19 and he says, well,
China's done an amazing job and let's just change subjects.
And like the woman keeps getting back to Taiwan and he won't recognize Taiwan
because China doesn't recognize Taiwan.
And China has some sort of strange, I don't know what it is,
but there's some sort of political influence on the world health organization.
Yeah. So there's a lot there. So first full disclosure,
I'm a member of the world health organization, international advisory committee,
human cast.
What's that? I said exactly, exactly.
Um, uh, advisory committee on human genome editing. Um, and, um,
so I'm actually a real supporter of the world health organization,
but there's a big problem.
And that problem is being realized and we're seeing it through the course of
this pandemic. So first in the earliest days of the, uh,
of the pandemic,
why was it that world health organization inspectors weren't able
to go to Wu Han?
And the reason was the Chinese government wouldn't give them visas.
And there was nothing that who could do. Why was it that, um, the,
who was just essentially unfortunately parroting the reporting
from the Chinese government in the earliest days.
And part of that at least is because they don't even have the authority to have
their own surveillance network.
Why is it referencing your point about Taiwan that Taiwan has all
kinds of expertise, um, in, uh,
treating and responding to terrible outbreaks like this,
which is why they've only had nine COVID deaths in Taiwan since the very
beginning. And why is it that the,
who is in this weird position it's in part because the,
who is created by these member states that have a lot of influence and it's
terrible.
And we we're all suffering because Taiwan didn't have a full voice tight on
December 31st,
2019 Taiwan declared a national emergency based on COVID.
That was way before we did. I wish Taiwan had had a bigger voice.
So who is in a really,
really difficult position because on one hand,
we're asking them to investigate and call out a member state. On the other hand,
their governing body essentially is made up of member states,
including China.
Yeah. It's, it's just so strange to see scientific inquiry and analysis
pushed and manipulated by.
Well, that's the whole story here. I mean, that's, that's,
unfortunately the story of COVID is that, I mean,
it was politics that made it so that you could have a,
this outbreak and we can talk more about where the outbreak started,
but wherever it started, whether it was a lab leak or something else,
if you had had a fully functioning system,
if it hadn't been Chinese politics and the national Institute,
the national and instinct, or the natural instinct,
hadn't been to cover up to silence the whistleblowers to give,
to lie essentially to the world health organization and the international
community.
It could well have been possible to suppress COVID in the first few weeks,
and we wouldn't be having any of this. So,
and then it was politics that made China, again, whatever the origin, um,
carry out this massive coverup over the course of the last year,
where they destroyed samples, eliminated, or removed databases, uh,
imprisoned journalists, Chinese journalists,
asking tough questions and put a universal gag order on their scientists,
uh, making it impossible for them to speak about, about any of this stuff.
That's.
Pretty incredible that that's not really well known.
Yeah. I mean, I I've, so for me,
it's been more than a year and I have it on my Jamie Metsul website.
And I've been trying to tell everybody not to point fingers, but to say like,
we have a real problem here,
unless we can just be really honest about what's the problem that we're facing.
How are we possibly going to.
Address it now? What is the circumstantial evidence?
Sorry. So let me, let me start from the beginning of this. So, um,
we know we have a long history of these pathogenic outbreaks and they tend to
happen, uh,
in more tropical parts of China in Southeast Asia and just
tropical, uh, parts of the world. So when SARS,
when this outbreak began, um, uh, for me,
I had a little bit of background.
One of the reasons why I started to get suspicious very early on is I
recently before then been in Wu Han. And I knew what UConn,
wasn't a place where a bunch of yokels are eating bats.
Wu Han is a really sophisticated city, it's their Chicago. Uh,
and I knew that they didn't have horseshoe bats in Wu Han.
As a matter of fact, when the outbreak happened, it was, uh,
it was winter there. And so there weren't, that's there. Um,
and I knew early on that this whole story of the wet market, uh, was a lie.
And as the Chinese government knew, and they, for many, many months push that,
uh, that story, um, even knowing it wasn't true, how'd, you know,
it was a lie well [inaudible] story because there was a paper that
came out in the Lancet in January of 2020.
And in that paper, it made clear, uh,
that around a third of the first COVID cases had no
exposure to the wet to that market. And so if everything started in the market,
you would have expected all of the early cases to have had a market
exposure. And so that was known, their government knew that in January,
but they didn't admit it until may of last year. Was there a common.
Denominator for all the people that were.
Exposed or that's, that's the big question now,
so that the finding patient so-called patient zero that's
the essential, the essential question.
If the lab lake hypothesis is true,
then either patient zero, um,
would be someone who works at one of the, these Chinese virology institutes,
probably the one Institute of virology, or, um,
it would be someone who was exposed to a virus that had somehow escaped from
that,
whether it was through waste or maybe an animal escaped or something like that,
if this,
they alternative story that many scientists believe and could also could well be
true, uh, that the patient zero, it comes from a series.
There was animal to animal butter called intermediate hosts.
It started with the bat and then went back to a pangolin or whatever,
and eventually to a human.
Then you would find a patient zero somewhere.
That was that first human. But if, I mean,
I think this is a really important point. Um, if that's the case,
you'd have to say, well, what are the chances that,
that patient zero from this series of animal to animal,
to human transmissions, it just happens to be,
it shows up in Wu Han,
which is the only city in China with a level four virology
Institute that has the world's largest collection of bat
coronaviruses that is doing gain of function research,
trying to make those viruses more, very lint,
particularly by making them more easily able to infect
human cells. So, in my mind, if you,
if patient zero is just somebody who had an exposure to an animal,
you have the mathematical odds of that person just showing up in, in Wu Han,
um, would be actually kind of absurd.
Also an issue with the actual structure of the virus itself, right?
Yes. Yeah. So w well, this is a virus that is, um,
ready-made for getting to humans for the first SARS.
We were able to track how it jumped and you could see in
retrospect how you could see it got closer and closer. And as, as the,
the virus mutated,
it became more able to infect humans.
This virus showed up fully able to infect humans
in a matter of fact,
in the comparative studies of different animals, including humans,
humans are the most susceptible to the SARS cov two virus.
So somehow you have to explain how this virus shows up kind of
seemingly out of nowhere in [inaudible] ready for action,
ready to fully infect infect humans, no.
This level for virology lab it's in Wu Han,
what are they doing those studies for? Like, what is the intent?
Yeah,
it's a really important question because there are a lot of people who are,
are saying things that I don't agree with that, oh, this is some kind of
military bio weapon and,
and say what you want about Chinese government. They're not stupid.
Um, and so for them, I, I truly believe if you had to ask me,
what's the most likely story. Um,
I believe that they recognized that these kinds of pathogens are
a big threat to humans and that we're getting more and more,
the frequency of these kinds of outbreaks is growing.
And rather than being behind the curve and waiting for, uh,
for some terrible outbreak, the idea was, well,
can we predict how these viruses will evolve? Um,
can we get ahead of the game in developing treatments and vaccines for what we
think may be coming? And that's what this,
this gain of function research is about.
And so we know that the Chinese government, uh, that the I'm sorry,
the Wuhan Institute of virology was doing this kind of gain of function
research. Some of it is actually funded, um,
with United States government money through the NIH.
And I know you'll get a lot of action in the Twitter sphere on, on this, but,
um, so we know, and I,
and I truly believe that there was well-intentioned work
trying to develop vaccines and treatments,
trying to understand how the most dangerous pathogens might, uh, might develop.
And if my hypothesis is, is true,
I think that there was an accident and there's a whole history of people who
were warning saying why we're trying to, um, prevent some kind of future threat,
but in our effort to prevent it,
we're actually increasing the likelihood of it happening.
It wasn't that lab cited in 2018 for safety violations.
As well. So the U S embassy, uh,
sent a small delegation. They visited the lab, uh,
and then there was, there were two cables about this saying, Hey,
this is really dangerous.
They're doing experimentation with these dangerous Corona viruses, um,
and their safety protocols, aren't up to snuff.
So there was a lot of warning and a lot of fear.
Catch new of the Joe Rogan experience for free. Only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J R E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data costs. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan.